
Okay. Good morning. Next Monday, between 4 and 5 in the afternoon, I have a meeting. So, Professors Ruan and An will take care of that hour. If you have any questions, you could consult them. Their offices are listed in the first handout I gave you. The Monday after that, November the 1st, there'll be a midterm, a qi zhong kao shi.It's just for one and a half hours. Instead of the lecture, you'll have the qi zhong kao shi. （好的。早上好。下周一，下午4点到5点之间，我有一个会议。所以，阮教授和安教授会负责那一小时。如果你们有任何问题，可以咨询他们。他们的办公室地址在我发给你们的第一份讲义上有列出。再下一个周一，也就是11月1日，将会有一场期中考试（qi zhong kao shi）。考试时间只有一个半小时。那天没有讲座，你们将进行期中考试。）

Last time, we first talked about the geometrical proof that if a body has an initial position and a final position, a rigid body, with an initial position and a final position, we want to prove that there is a point, if a rigid body has one point which is fixed, and it has an initial position and a final position, then there is a point, there's an axis on the body which is not moved in that motion.（上一次，我们首先讨论了几何证明：如果一个刚体具有初始位置和最终位置，我们想要证明存在一个点，如果刚体有一个固定点，并且它具有初始位置和最终位置，那么在该运动中，刚体上存在一个不动的轴。）

Remember that that has nothing to do with the intermediate steps. You can have a body, this point is fixed, you can move it in whatever way. We don't care about the intermediate steps. We only care about the initial position and the final position. We only care about the initial position and the final position. We don't care about the intermediate steps.What we want to prove is that from the beginning to the end, there is a point which is fixed. （记住，这与中间步骤无关。你可以有一个物体，这个点是固定的，你可以以任何方式移动它。我们不关心中间步骤。我们只关心初始位置和最终位置。我们只关心初始位置和最终位置。我们不关心中间步骤。我们想要证明的是，从开始到结束，有一个点是固定的。）


It's a rotation. A student pointed out that in my proof, there is a defect.Because I had proven that A'B'N, 根據A'B'N'是兩個一樣的三角形 The three sides of ABN and the three sides of ABN' are respectively identical. So I said that M must be equal to M'. And some students pointed out that that's not entirely correct, because how about this one? Could A'B'N' be like this? That's a correct point.

There's a defect in my previous proof. But it can be easily gotten around. Because in ABN, if you go around from A' to B' to N, the triangle is on your left side.And so would this be. But with this one, A'B', when you go around A'B' M', the triangle is on your right side. Of course, if you have a rigid motion, a triangle cannot change from a right-handed circle to a left-handed circle.So therefore, this one is not. So we still have M equal to M'. Actually, this argument is dependent on the fact that on a sphere, if you have a triangle of the first kind, namely, when you go around it, this triangle is on your left side.If you now move this triangle on the surface, it remains that way. Therefore, the surface of the sphere is called orientable. Not all surfaces are orientable.In a Nubian strip, this is the simplest and the most famous example. If you take a strip of paper, if you take a long strip of paper, if you take a long strip of paper and glue it together this way, there's nothing strange about this. If you draw a triangle on it going counterclockwise, you move that triangle on the surface, when you come back, it will be the same.But if you twist this 180 degrees and then glue it together, then you have a surface like this. Then it becomes a non-orientable surface. Because if I have a triangle here going left-sided, when I go around, it goes to the other way.So there are differences between orientable and non-orientable surfaces. And that is a very important difference when you talk about topology. Topology is a 20th century main aspect of mathematics.Maybe I told you this before. In the 19th century, mathematics had three important divisions. Analysis, algebra, and geometry.In the 20th century, there's a new idea that's greatly developed, and that's called topology. So the main areas of mathematics consist now of four. And what is found is that the four are deeply related.Okay, last time, we had the following formula. X prime is equal to I prime, J prime, K prime. And we have the formula X prime is equal to X gamma.And we have the formula gamma R prime is equal to R. And we have the formula gamma, gamma is equal to 1. And determinant of gamma is equal to 1. This gamma matrix is, so we say gamma is an element of SO3. Now I want to give another proof of gamma, gamma tilde equal to R. Let us write this equation X prime equal to X gamma explicitly. It's I prime, J prime, K prime, times some 3 by, sorry, equal to I, J, K, times a 3 by 3 matrix.Let's write the 3 by 3 matrix as ABC, A prime, B prime, C prime. A double prime, B double prime, C double prime. So I take the first element of both sides.That's the unit vector in the X direction of the new system. It's equal to AI plus BJ plus CK. By matrix multiplication.What does that mean? That means ABC are the, A in the X direction, B in the Y direction, C in the Z direction. The three of them add together is I prime. So that means ABC are the components.This formula means ABC are the respective components of I prime along the X, Y, Z direction, along the I, J, K direction. Similarly, A prime, B prime, C prime. Let us give that a name.Let's call it, we regard it as a vector. We call it row one. So row one is this vector.It is the unit vector of the prime system. Similarly, we have row two, equal to this. Row three, equal to this.We take the matrix gamma and consider the first three elements as a vector. The next three elements as another vector. The last column, three elements, as a third vector.So I now have three vectors, row one, row two, row three. Then it is clear that row one, so therefore row one squared. Row one tilde, row one, is the absolute value squared of row one.And that has to be equal to one because that is the length squared of I prime. So this has to be equal to one. Similarly, this has to be equal to row two, we regard row two.This is equal to row three, we regard row three. Because row one, row two, row three are nothing but the three new unit vectors. I prime, J prime, Z prime, K prime.Now if I take row one, row two. That's the dot product between row one and row two. If you have two vectors, this is the scalar product.The scalar product between row one and row two is the scalar product between I prime and J prime. And by definition, it's a new coordinate system. The three axes are all perpendicular to each other.So therefore this is equal to zero. So these two lines really mean that the row one, row two, row three are unit vectors. This line means row one, row two, row three are orthogonal to each other.Orthogonal means triggered. So this matrix now, we now have the geometrical meaning of this matrix. The first column, and the second column, and the third column are three unit vectors which are perpendicular to each other.That statement is equivalent to the statement... That statement is equivalent to the statement gamma with theta is equal to one. Why? Because I write down this row one, this gamma. Let's consider what this form, this is.This is, this matrix, A, B, C. A prime, B prime, C prime. A double prime, B double prime, C double prime. Gamma theta is the same thing, only turned around.So it's A, A prime, A double prime. B, B prime, B double prime. C, C prime, C double prime.This is the definition. Now you see, the first corner element is ABC times ABC. That's row one squared.That's equal to one. If I take the next element, it's this times this. And that's row one times row two, which is zero.The third one is ABC times A double prime, B double prime, C double prime. That's row one times row three, and that's equal to zero. So you see that this is equal to I. Gamma theta, gamma equal to I merely means that these three vectors, if you consider the three columns of gamma as three vectors, then the three vectors are orthonormal.Ortho means that they are orthogonal. Normal means that they're each of length one. But from this we know that gamma theta is equal to gamma inverse.And from that we know that gamma, gamma theta is equal to one. These are algebraically true. So what is the meaning of gamma, gamma theta? We just had gamma theta, gamma equal to one.This one is gamma, gamma theta is also equal to one. Now what's the geometrical meaning of gamma, gamma theta equal to one? It is that if you take this, if you consider this to be a vector, now instead of taking columns, you take rows, this to be one, let's say called eta one, eta two, eta three. Then eta one, eta two, eta three form an orthonormal system.So the gamma matrix has the property that either you take the columns, then you get three vectors which are orthonormal to each other, or you take rows, they also form an orthonormal system. Okay, what I just said everybody has to understand, because whether you are an experimental physicist, whether you will become an experimental physicist, or a theoretical physicist, three by three matrices, properties of three by three matrices you have to be familiar with. And one of the most important type of three by three matrices is gamma.So with all this preparation work, we are now ready to give an algebraic proof of what we proved last time geometrically. Namely, from one position, if one point is fixed, into another position, in that motion, there has to be one axis which is not moved. So in order to do that, we must first introduce a new algebraic idea.It's called eigenvalue. Now everybody has to understand eigenvalue. If you cannot understand eigenvalue, you cannot understand quantum mechanics.Quantum mechanics is based on the concept of eigenvalues. So the definition of eigenvalue is very, very simple. We have a matrix gamma.Now, I take gamma, the others, I take A minus lambda, B, C. A prime, B prime minus lambda, C prime. A double prime, B double prime, C double prime minus lambda. I take the gamma matrix and subtract lambda from each of the diagonal elements.If I expand this, expand the determinant, the first term is A minus lambda times B prime minus lambda times C double prime minus lambda. If you multiply that out, you get the minus lambda cubed term, plus alpha lambda squared plus beta lambda. So you have the cubed term, squared term, linear term, and you have the term without lambda.The term without lambda is the determinant of... The term which does not involve lambda means you erase all the lambda. So it's the determinant. That determinant we know is equal to one.So we know it's plus one. Does everybody understand what I just said? Okay, I now have an algebraic equation with real coefficients. Everything is real so far.So I have a cubic equation. Now, a cubic equation must have one real root. How do we prove this? Does anybody know why a cubic equation must have one real root? Okay, raise your hand if you know how to prove this.I'm disappointed. Nobody knows how to prove? I thought Tsinghua has the best students. Is it because you are too shy? Okay.Why does a cubic equation with real coefficients must have a real root? Because if you consider that polynomial, let's write this as a polynomial. When lambda goes to positive infinity, when lambda is very, very large, you can neglect all those terms. So it becomes minus lambda cubed.So p is negative. When lambda becomes minus infinity, again you can neglect these terms. These terms become positive.So from lambda equal to minus infinity to lambda equal to plus infinity, that curve has to go from the bottom to the top. So in the process, it has to cross. When lambda goes to positive infinity, it has to go to negative.It goes this way. When lambda is minus infinity, it has to go this way. So therefore, the curve has to be something like this.In which case, it has three roots. But it can also be this way. In which case, it has one root.In any case, it has to cross the x-axis at least once. So there must be one real root. How about the other two roots? So there's one real.The other two... The other two roots must be complex congruents of each other. You either have three roots. Let me now state a theorem.When you root the three roots, these roots are called eigenvalues. Eigenvalue is a German word originally. Eigen is a German word.But because this idea...

接下来转录 W001